My name is Vicki MacDonald and I'm at Holy Trinity Church, Llandernow, for the longest
yarn and I'm going to speak to Graham and he's going to tell me about his father's
exploits during the Second World War. It was Cedric John Charles Hickman. I'll never forget
he signed himself. CJC Hickman sounded very posh. In fact, he was completely down to earth.
He came from what's known as the Black Country, which is in central UK, West Midlands. He
was an amazing sportsman and never wanted to take second place. So it seemed natural
to him. I think he was only just 18 when war broke out or was coming. He signed up for
the RAF and was immediately sent away from the UK to America where there was a huge training
program in action to try and get the RAF ready for the onslaught, which they thought and
did in fact happen. So luckily, he missed the very start, which was of course the Battle
of Britain. Otherwise, I suspect he would have been like many people and have been killed
before he really got any flying time in. So he arrived back in 1941 and was immediately
put on hurricanes and thoroughly enjoyed, he told me, strafing at anything that moved
over the other side of the Channel with scant regard for his own safety. And when asked
by the commander what posting he would like, he said, I'd like a faster airplane. Well,
the Spitfire was quite fast, but the plane that was faster was the wooden Mosquito. And
he got his way. Not many people got to pilot them. They were quite cantankerous, fast they
certainly were. And he would tell me stories. His eyes would light up and he would live
those moments and he thoroughly enjoyed it. He had a spell of intruder missions. He led
Lancasters and Pathfinders at night, bombing the targets with flares so the Lancasters
could accurately bomb and destroy the targets. Sometimes civilians, sometimes not. That's
war. But then a spell of night fighting, which he said was really just a matter of luck,
despite what people will tell you. You were lucky. You'd had a snapshot at a Heinkel or
a Junkers 88. You got away with it or you didn't. He was lucky. He did. He shot down
some
vagy and for his exploits was awarded a spell as a flying instructor. This he tells me was the
most dangerous time of his life. He was nearly killed three times. He made a model out of one
of the crashed the crashed OXFORDs, which was the two engine plane which he taught people to fly
have still got to this day, a quite proud place on my mantle piece, fond memories. However,
before much further went on, he did a tiny piece with DJ Landings with 49 Squadron, I
think. And then immediately, as it looked like it was all going to be okay for the invasion,
was shipped over to Burma and to India, of all places. A sort of second front, which
was happening over there, taking the faithful mosquitoes, which they actually flew all the
way with several hops. And he said that was incredibly arduous, especially for the navigator,
no GPS in those days. So when they got there and had rested off, they went on missions,
navigation missions, strafing, bombing, supply. The most versatile airplane of all really
was the Mosquito. But trouble was to strike in a most peculiar fashion. Several of his
Squadron, by that time he was a Squadron leader, failed to return after missions. They couldn't
pin it down until one day when he got out after a mission. And I believe this is true,
I have no reason to doubt it. He slung his kit bag over the back tailplane, which promptly then
dropped off. And when he looked, he could see it had been eaten away by termites. The Squadron was
immediately grounded. And lo and behold, the Achilles heel of such a great airplane was found
to be the termite, the tiny creature. And when they looked more and more closely, they found that
the main spars inside aircraft had been indeed eaten away. So luck was on his side. That was a
close run thing. So he returned a hero back to his job, which he regretted. He really wanted to
stay on the RAF. They did actually ask him to go to RAF Valley for a short while, which is where
he fell in love with North Wales. And latterly, he purchased a caravan for the young children,
myself and my sister. And we were dragged, I say dragged, I certainly loved it. Over to Valley,
we met the Squadron commander and we had wonderful picnics in the sand dunes where I would enviously
look at the fighters screeching overhead and dad would just mutter, they're just bits of tin with
fire up their bottoms. He was always a bit of a petrolhead really. So that was really a brand
finale for a wonderful career. Thank you so much. And did you take, have you taken up flying? Did you?
I joined the ATC and when I was at grammar school, I went to his grammar school. Bad move. He'd won
everything and did everything. But I remember one day in the sports room on the big wall was
the name of everybody in the different houses and the fastest runners. And without really, I shouldn't
say this modesty, but I looked and saw 100, 220, 440, 880 yards, one name, Hickman. And it was me.
So I never made head boy, I say I joined the ATC, but I was to join the Royal Navy and became a Marine
and I'll just skip over the, it was great fun. I never thought I'd ever, it was only short service,
I never thought I'd ever sort of do that kind of thing again. But 1983, I got a letter through the
post saying I was required for duty. So I was off to the Falklands. So I was involved with that and
we were in before anyone else and we took the SAS into, what's the word I can suppose, suppress
the forces which we were told by the American Secret Service were the
youngsters that were being trained up in guerrilla warfare. And we found out to our cost,
it was actually the crack regiment of all the Argentinians with the general, which was the
prize possession because we actually nabbed him, very expensive, lost a lot of friends,
but we did our job and back home. And that was the end for me, I'm glad to say. I was a bit
shut up, but no huge problems for the rest of my life other than I went back to engineering
and then ended up being a mountain guide, wandering the mountains, dragging people up things they
shouldn't and wouldn't go up and then returned to where Dad bought the first caravan,
which was Conway. So I now walk my cully and watch the planes fly over from valley.
You do, don't they? Quite low. Very moving. Yes, it is. Oh, thank you so much. Thank you.